---
title: "The Losing Battle: The Common Application Process"
publishDate: 23 Oct 2024
description: Thoughts on the college admissions process
---

If taken at face value, the college process is a simple sorting system ensuring that students are sorted into universities that accurately reflect their abilities and achievements to ensure a good fit between colleges and their incoming freshmen. However, behind this veneer of meritocratic values lies a slew of hidden agendas, unwritten criteria, and self-serving interests of the universities. In his article “[Getting In](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1KPUQfT48xivNLst2db_fAEIOfIQwVHQT/view?usp=drivesdk),” Malcolm Gladwell talks about how colleges are more interested in the next “superstars” and the publicity that comes with “creating” these individuals rather than looking at the most qualified candidates for admissions. He notes that colleges purposefully push away the most intelligent and accomplished students out of fear that they may choose a stable and comfortable life rather than chasing stardom in their chosen field. The first and most controversial criteria students often neglect is the need for “diverse” candidates and separating themselves from the tens of thousands of students competing against them. What this means is that students will need to devise clever ways to come off as “diverse” and "unique” next to their fellow classmates. This means that they often have to “put on a show,” and rather than focusing on their actual academic interests and qualifications, they attempt to cobble together a series of unrelated extracurricular activities to show proof of incredibly vague and abstract traits such as “leadership” and “perseverance.” This means that in reality, the college application process has less to do with individual ability than many students actually think and more with how well they are able to convince colleges that they have certain desirable personality traits. 

The unfair nature of the college admissions process can also be seen when looking at it from a financial standpoint. This arduous process that can span months can be made significantly easier by simply throwing money at it via resources such as private counselors, essay editors, and affluent connections for internships. Paul Fain’s “[Class Matters](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1KcSAqZ9Pl2RkG7SrJolT_ys9jvQzI1in/view?usp=drivesdk)” explores this disparity, observing how children from poorer school districts are unable to even consider applying to top schools and are not given the resources they need to build a strong application and have a chance at attending an elite institution, even if they may be intelligent enough. This creates a vicious cycle where the rich can give their children the resources to attend these elite institutions and therefore get the best jobs after and remain rich while the poorer children are unable to find a foothold in the educational system at all, being left behind to fend for themselves through this convoluted and intimidating journey. This disparity is only worsened by the ever growing criteria of often expensive activities that students must participate in to look competitive. Internships, which are all the rage at the moment, often require personal connections with people in industries that are likely much more difficult to make for children from impoverished backgrounds. The same can be said for conducting research at colleges, which require contacts with influential professors and heads of departments at different universities, which once again are much easier for affluent students who may already have family and friends in these positions.

The end result of all of this is a process that forces students to fake who they are and put on a charade in front of admissions officers to be noticed. This phenomenon is shown as its most extreme through Paul Rudnick’s “[College Application Essay](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1eJJ2RVTIhSPOLId47VyzBiwLs7l-lbPe/view?usp=drivesdk),” where he humorously talks about the lengths that students must go to exhibit themselves as beings of almost divine power and insight, in the hopes of being noticed by a university they want to attend. Students must somehow be simultaneously confident while also being humble, resilient while also being vulnerable, and competitive while also being cooperative. This amalgamation of entirely incompatible traits is essentially impossible for one human being to possess, yet it is what is expected of students as they write their personal statement and supplementals. As a result of this impossible task, students feel a need to completely fabricate at least parts of their life experiences and how they must come off as almost paradoxically “well rounded” to be seen as prospective students. Near the end, Rudnick also demonstrates the earlier stated financial inequities. In this process, by explaining how he has easily paid someone else to write his own essay for him. This satirical tar and feathering of the personal statement and the criteria for it demonstrates more than anything else how the college admissions process incentivizes disingenuousness over actual merit and ability. 
